We now have a special treat.
Brother Stephen Lett of the Governing Body
will give a talk
based on a specific Bible verse.
His talk is “‘Sing Out Joyfully’ to Jehovah!”
Mark my words, this is a special treat!
I hope I can live up to his comments.
David did it as he played on his harp.
The Levites did it regularly at the temple.
Jesus did it shortly before being executed.
Paul and Silas did it while in stocks,
deep in a prison dungeon.
The resurrected anointed do it
as they stand before Jehovah’s throne.
What activity are we talking about?
We’re talking about singing
songs of praise to Jehovah.
And, of course, all of us want
to imitate these fine Bible examples.
But now,
how do we want to sing these songs?
What approach?
Well, let’s go to 1 Chronicles 15,
and let’s see how we want to sing
these songs of praise.
First Chronicles 15:16:
“David then told the chiefs of the Levites
“to appoint their brothers the singers,”
now notice, “to sing out joyfully,
“accompanied by musical instruments:
stringed instruments, harps, and cymbals.”
Now, does this scripture say
that we should move our lips
but with no sound
coming out of our mouth?
Can you imagine Jesus singing like that?
Does this scripture indicate
we should mumble our words?
speak in an undertone,
like we do sometimes when we read the Bible?
No, we’re told “to sing out”!
That means, obviously,
enthusiastically projecting our voices.
Perhaps you remember a picture
in the inside cover pages
of one of our previous songbooks.
It was a picture of the Levites singing.
And obviously they
were projecting their voices.
In fact, their mouths were so wide open,
you could almost see their tonsils.
Well, good example for us.
Think about this:
Many worldly people will sing out
worldly songs with a joyful attitude.
Well, much more so to our God,
who is worthy
of such worshipful praise,
do we want to give it
to him enthusiastically.
But now let’s look at a brief video
that highlights some of the history
of how Jehovah’s people
have always felt about singing
songs of praise to Jehovah.
I love singing to Jehovah.
It’s something
that I find so personally strengthening.
I think it’s such a wonderful privilege
to be able to praise
Jehovah’s name by singing.
Mind you, I would never be called
a professional singer.
We know that birds sing,
but they’re not singing praises to Jehovah.
And, of course, dogs bark and cats meow,
but humans can really sing
and praise Jehovah with their words.
And it always reminds me
of the account in the book of Acts,
Acts chapter 16,
where it talks about the apostle Paul
and Silas when they were in prison.
It says:
“But about the middle of the night,
“Paul and Silas were praying
“and praising God with song,
and the prisoners were listening to them.”
Obviously,
the songs that they sang at that time
helped them to ease the pain
of their very sore backs;
they had been beaten.
So the spiritual side of us
becomes stronger when we sing.
In our organization
from the very beginning, hymns were used.
But then the brothers and sisters
began producing their own songs,
and they put them into a book form.
Back in 1944,
we released a songbook
that was called
the Kingdom Service Songbook.
And after a half million copies
had been released
and just six years later (1950),
we came out with a brand new songbook,
Songs to Jehovah’s Praise.
Now, no doubt
many of the brothers wondered,
‘Why are we doing this?’
But, of course, you see,
the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures
had just been released in 1950.
And then we’ve had several books
that have been released
down through the decades.
So it’s always been
a part of the modern-day worship.
You know, when you ponder
what we’ve discussed thus far,
you’re probably beginning to ask yourself,
‘When are we going to get our new songbook?’
Well, I must tell you
that the songbook project
has proved to be more challenging,
more complex
than the Governing Body anticipated.
But, nevertheless,
despite the challenges and the complications,
we’re confident that we’re going
to be able to release this book
to you within less than 12 months.
In fact, we’re talking
about much less than 12 months.
We’re talking about right now!
The Governing Body
is very happy to release . . .
I don’t think I had most of you fooled.
We are so happy to release this new songbook,
entitled “Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah.
That’s the “SOJJ” book, Brother Herd.
This new songbook,
“Sing Out Joyfully” to Jehovah,
is being provided in three formats:
There’s the small
and the large with musical notations,
and then there’s
(in the large size only) lyrics only.
And you’re going to be able
to obtain your personal copy
electronically in English.
This will be Monday, October the 3rd.
So we’re talking
about just two days from now.
You can go on jw.org,
Watchtower ONLINE LIBRARY,
or JW Library,
and you can get that copy
of this beautiful songbook.
But now, here’s a question,
How soon are we going to sing
songs from the new songbook?
Well, you’ll be happy to know
that beginning in January,
just three months from now,
English-speaking congregations
will begin to sing these new songs.
And you’ll be happy to know, too,
that the Governing Body
has arranged for a new provision
to come along with the new songbook.
We’re going to have
the lyrics in video format.
Now, we enjoyed right here
having the lyrics on the screen,
and we enjoyed it
during the summer conventions
—the regional and the special conventions.
Instead of having to look down
and try to look at your songbook
or your tablet,
we were able to hold our heads erect
and sing out joyfully to Jehovah.
Well, you’ll be able
to do that in the congregation.
But now, we talked about receiving
our songbook electronically,
and we noticed that many of you
are using electronic devices
in order to receive
the publications and to use them.
And this is commendable.
This saves the organization
considerable funds.
But what if you want
a hard copy of the new songbook?
Well, we’re happy
to inform you that you can order
through the congregation a hard copy.
Within a few days,
English-speaking congregations
and also several other
foreign-language speaking congregations
will receive a letter
telling you how you may submit the order.
And we’re happy to inform you too
that the hard copy songbook will have,
whether it’s the small or the large,
it’ll have the same
beautiful gray deluxe cover
that our revised
New World Translation Bible has.
So what a beautiful compliment
the songbook will be to the Bible.
For those who use hard copy,
you will truly enjoy using
the beautiful “gray twins.”
But now,
we talked about English mostly.
What about other languages?
Well, translations are being made
into other languages as we speak.
And as soon as possible,
these other language releases will be made.
In fact, I’ve been informed
that there will be
quite a number of other languages.
We’ll be able to release
the songbook in those languages
within less than 12 months.
And this time, I’m not teasing.
But additional information
will be provided as soon as available.
But now,
let’s discuss some interesting information
about the new songbook.
First, we’re going to talk
about the composition of the songs
and then a little bit
about the structure of the songbook.
But now you’re probably thinking:
‘Why is Brother Splane not presenting
this information?
Why is Brother Lett trying to present this?’
Well, I can understand your question;
I had the same question.
But the truth is,
all seven members
of the Governing Body love, very much,
singing songs of praise to Jehovah.
Of course, some are
a lot better singers than the rest of us.
And all of us are happy that we
don’t have student singing assignments
on the midweek meeting
because we wouldn’t want to send
the brothers running for their earplugs.
But now I’ve got to get serious.
Let’s talk about the composition
of the songs.
Well, here’s an interesting point:
Rather than request
contributed songs from various songwriters,
the Governing Body assigned a composer
and a lyricist team
to work specifically on the project.
And then the Governing Body
closely supervised that team.
For example,
providing subject themes for songs
that would be very relevant
to our meetings,
assemblies, conventions,
and the field ministry.
And the team worked very hard
specifically crafting each song
according to that direction.
Here’s another point that you can imagine:
The revised New World Translation
resulted in changing a lot of the lyrics
—a replacement of different words
and expressions.
Just a few examples:
Most references to Sheol, seed,
long-suffering have been replaced.
The song “Long-Suffering”
is now “Exercise Patience.”
The expression “loving-kindness”
is now “loyal love.”
“Time indefinite” has been replaced
with expressions
such as “forevermore” or “eternal life.”
Here’s another point:
Doctrinal refinements, of course,
affected some of the lyrics.
Just one example:
The expanded explanation
of the meaning of Jehovah’s name
resulted in opening the door
to more application
of Jehovah ‘Causing to Become.’
Here’s another point:
An effort was made to have
less direct counsel in the songs.
So rather than some feeling awkward
as they were singing praises
and that they were maybe giving
counsel to others as they were singing
—well, we’ve changed that.
That has been taken out.
Here’s another thing:
Certain awkward expressions
have been removed from the songs.
Just one example:
In one of our current songs,
there’s an expression that makes it appear
that single people are probably lonely.
Well, we took that out.
Here’s another detail,
and we present this in the form of a caution:
Be careful when you are singing
from the new songbook
because the majority of the songs
—these older songs—
have had lyrics adjusted.
So if you just sing
from your previous memory bank,
you’re going to find
yourself often in trouble.
But now, just a few comments
about the structure of the songbook:
An effort has been made
to put the songs in subject order.
And there are 15 categories now,
and the categories are listed
in the index in the front of the songbook.
The first 12 songs
appropriately are
under the category “Jehovah,”
and these are songs
of direct praise to Jehovah
or songs about his name
or his qualities.
“Meeting Together”
—that’s another category—
songs about our meeting together
and worshipping together.
The category “Godly Qualities”
—and included
among other songs in this section
are songs that develop each one
of the aspects
of the fruitage of the holy spirit
mentioned at Galatians 5:22, 23.
And they’re developed
in the order in the songbook
that they’re listed in that scripture.
So that’s very helpful.
But now here’s something
we’d like to say regarding the structure:
There is no significance to the song numbers
assigned to each song.
Over the years,
some have worked very hard
to try to figure out
the significance of the song numbers.
For example,
many concluded
it wasn’t just coincidence
that the song “Be Forgiving”
was song number 77.
Similarly,
the song “We’re Jehovah’s Witnesses,”
many thought
it was no coincidence that that song
was song number 1931; I mean 31.
But we want to tell you up front,
there is no significance
to the numbering and,
for that matter,
there was not in the current songbook.
The numbers are random,
with the songs placed
in the category they fit best in
and where they fit best
in regard to the engraving layout.
Now, here’s another thought:
Three of the older songs
have been removed
from the new songbook.
And quite a number
have been totally revised with new subjects.
For example, the song
“The Scene of This World Is Changing”
has now been totally revised
to a more positive subject,
“Keep Working, Watching, and Waiting.”
The song “Making Our Way Successful”
is now “Life Depends on God’s Word.”
The song formerly
“Content With God’s Good Gifts,”
which had limited use,
is now “Teaching the Word of God”
—a much more practical subject
for our meetings or our field ministry.
Now, here’s one more point
regarding the structure:
Many of the songs have been reformatted
and spread out over more pages.
Why?
Well, for one thing,
it gives more space for other languages
that need more space
to be able to put the lyrics
under the musical notes.
Another advantage by spreading them out:
It makes it easier to read the music
in the case of those who enjoy playing
the songs on piano.
But now, let’s look at another video,
and this one shows us some interesting facts
about the making of our new songbook.
The Governing Body’s support
for this project was unanimous.
One of the reasons
we felt it was especially important
was because of the revised
New World Translation.
It was important for us
to change the songs as well,
so that all the terminology
in the revised version would match the songs.
In our audience,
we have some of our brothers and sisters
who have the heavenly hope.
And, of course,
the majority in our audience
are looking forward
to life everlasting right here on the earth.
So the words of our songs
would have to include both groups.
There are a few songs
that were very rarely used
at meetings and assemblies
because of the subject.
They may have been relevant subjects
years back but not anymore.
So those songs,
the same melody is being used
but you’ll find
there’s a brand new theme.
In our songbook in recent years,
there has definitely been an effort
to have more diversity of style.
It really helps all of us
—no matter what our background
or from what part
of the world we come from—
to be unified in our worship.
When we get the music from the arranger,
we have to format it so it fits properly
to the page
as it will appear in the songbook.
We supply the branches
with music-only notation,
and this way
they can pour in the translated lyrics.
Songs really are
probably the most difficult
translation project that you can handle.
Take an English verse
like “listen, obey, and be blessed.”
It’s not difficult to express
that idea in another language,
but the music there
has only seven notes:
la, la, la, la, la, la, la.
So the challenge is to express those ideas
and make them
fit into those seven notes.
So for all of these reasons,
this is the work of a lyricist
—someone who can rewrite the song
and make sure that it conveys
the right ideas, the right mood,
but at the same time that it is poetic
and that it touches the heart
of those who are going to sing it.
What a wonderful thing to think
that worldwide in hundreds of languages
our brothers and sisters
are having the very same experience:
being able to use their words
to praise Jehovah in song.
The Governing Body
feels very strongly about singing.
So that’s why they actually created a cover
that looks
just like the New World Translation.
The songbook has been organized
into subject order.
There are more songs in the book;
there are 151 songs.
But also the songs
have been spread out a little bit more.
That’s mainly for translation.
The website will have easier navigation tools
to help us to find
the song number we’re looking for.
So we can listen to the song
or the vocal rendition
while the phrase that is to be sung
during that portion
of the song will highlight
as the song plays through.
We need to take the time right now
to learn these new songs
and then to sing them.
You know, sing them all the time
—sing them
when we’re working around the house,
sing them when we’re in the car,
sing them when we come together
for social gatherings with our brothers.
They have the power to strengthen us.
It’s showing respect for Jehovah
when we actually stand there
with the congregation
and sing with the congregation.
It brings the congregation
together in worship.
So when we combine how we feel
and when we sing from our hearts,
we can be sure that Jehovah
will accept that as appreciation.
Well, I think this scripture at Psalm 104:33
really reflects the feelings
of all of Jehovah’s people when it says:
“I will sing to Jehovah throughout my life;
I will sing praises to my God
as long as I live.”
That’s the desire that we all have
—to be able to sing
praises to Jehovah forever.
Obviously, our new songbook
is a gift from the Giver
of “every good gift
and every perfect present.”
You brothers and sisters are going
to love singing from the new songbook.
So by all means, use it to the full.
Use it completely
to “sing out joyfully” to Jehovah!
We told you it would be a special treat.
Not only was Brother Lett’s delivery special
but we have the special treat
of a new songbook now.
And we add it
to the long line of songbooks
that have come before.
Some of you can reach back many years
with various different songbooks.
The songbook is,
to describe it, praiseworthy.
You see that in your notes?
What does that mean?
Highly commendable
—that’s our songbook.
Now, if that was special,
this next part is truly unique.
I do not remember ever hearing an interview
from this unique group of interviewees.
Brother Ralph Walls,
a helper to the Personnel Committee
of the Governing Body,
will take the lead
in the video interview entitled
Jehovah Cares for
and Strengthens Faithful Ones.
The video, please.
Jehovah’s care for each
of his faithful servants
is felt especially
during times of difficulty.
The apostle Paul experienced
what he called “a thorn in the flesh.”
I’d like to read to you what he said
about that in 2 Corinthians chapter 12.
I’ll read portions of verses 9 and 10.
Speaking of the Lord, he said:
“But he said to me:
“‘My undeserved kindness
is sufficient for you,
“‘for my power
is being made perfect in weakness.’”
Verse 10,
“So I take pleasure in weaknesses,
“ . . . and difficulties, for Christ.
For when I am weak, then I am powerful.”
While it’s the responsibility of each one
to give balanced attention to their health,
still, there are problems that arise.
Therefore, the Governing Body
has made arrangements
for all branches
to assist special full-time servants
with their health-care needs
and, that is,
within the circumstances
of each branch.
The United States branch is privileged
to have a group
of dedicated brothers and sisters
who render such care.
We’re going to talk to nine
of our physicians serving at Bethel,
and we’re going
to introduce them alphabetically.
First, we have Brother Samuel Worae Boakye,
who’s been serving us for 11 years at Bethel;
Brother Jack Carleton,
who’s been with us for 40 years
(it’s hard to believe
because Jack claims he’s 39);
Anne Marie Correia,
who’s been with us for three years;
Enrique Corvalan, for eight years;
Brother Walter Ferguson, for 30 years;
Luis Garza, 26 years;
Brother James Harper, for 26 years;
Brother James Howard, for 28 years;
and Olga Manson, for 15 years.
What a wonderful representative group!
I’d like to ask you dear folks
to share with us your experience
of learning the truth
and how that impacted your profession.
And, Brother Carleton,
would you please start off with it?
The truth was introduced
through the door-to-door ministry.
I was doing research
at the National Institutes of Health
in Washington, D.C.,
and the Cancer Institute
and planning
to go on into neurosurgery.
But the knock came on the door.
The brother came in,
and he presented the Kingdom hope
from Genesis to Revelation.
And my wife and I said:
“That’s marvelous
“—to live forever on earth
and have no sickness
“and enjoy peace and security forever!
What a wonderful hope!”
And then he added to that,
“You know that God has a name?”
And we didn’t know that.
So now to know Jehovah personally
—it touched us.
And that’s all it took.
From that time on,
we wanted to be in full-time service
and aid Bethel,
if we could, in the future.
Very interesting.
Thank you.
And, Sister Correia, Anne Marie,
what about yourself?
Well, I started to study the Bible
in my last year of medical school
and then went on
to work part-time as a doctor
to be able to regular pioneer
with my husband
from 1997 till 2009.
In 2009,
I stopped practicing medicine
to expand my ministry
in the Hindi congregation in Montreal
until I was called to Bethel in 2013.
Wonderful!
And we’re glad you’re here too.
Walter,
share with us your experience, please?
I was contacted
in the door-to-door work
in Buffalo, New York.
I had a very good, effective Bible teacher
who was able to help
to revive in me a spiritual interest.
And I made it a formal study
my last years in medical school,
and I was baptized
not long after I graduated
from medical school.
Excellent!
Thank you.
Luis Garza from Monterrey, México,
tell us about your experience.
My first contact with the truth
was after I had been practicing
medicine for 16 years.
A patient of mine came
with a sore throat and two magazines,
and she was a Jehovah’s Witness.
At that time,
I was having some scary experiences
where the demons were involved,
although I was not looking for them.
And I was earnestly praying
to God for help.
I didn’t know his name,
but I knew he existed.
And at that time, the patient came
and one of the magazines
had on the front cover,
with big letters,
the word “spiritism.”
So first, I said,
“I don’t want anything with that;
I already have enough problems.”
But she said,
“This is to protect yourself,
not to practice it.”
So I took the magazines,
read them, and after that
a local elder
started studying the Bible with me.
And that’s how I came into the truth.
Beautiful!
And we’re so glad
to have you serving us at Bethel.
And, Brother Harper?
I requested a Bible study
immediately after finishing
high school at age 18.
And because
of the rigorous premedical program
that I was involved with,
it was difficult to continue my study.
I restarted a few years later,
and my formal graduation from medical school
was one week after my baptism.
When I came to Bethel,
I offered to come one week a month,
commuting from Atlanta, Georgia.
And so I did that for six months.
They asked me to come to Bethel full-time,
and I did that six months later
and have been at Bethel ever since.
That’s an interesting sideline
—you commuted
from Atlanta, Georgia,
for a year.
Beautiful!
And, Brother Howard,
help us with the situation
that you were faced with
when you were introduced to the truth.
When my wife and I learned the truth,
then, immediately that changed our attitude
towards what was important in life.
And I was able to cut down
to part-time work,
because it was just really a means
of supporting my family then,
and auxiliary pioneer on a regular basis
and then planning
to become a regular pioneer.
But then in 1983,
Bethel called us
and invited us to come in
for me to serve as a medical doctor
because there was a great need.
Within three months, we’d sold our house;
I’d left my practice;
and with our ten-year-old daughter,
we came to Brooklyn Bethel.
And today
that daughter is a Bethel sister
married to a responsible brother.
They’re serving here together.
So the family is together in their service.
We appreciate that.
Now we want to move into an area
that’s a little bit more sobering.
You deal with a family who are very sick,
sometimes terminally ill.
Sam Worae,
how are you affected personally
when you are exposed to that?
Well, serving as a Bethel physician
definitely is a unique privilege
but also a challenging one.
Because unlike physicians on the outside
who are detached from their patients,
we have an attachment
with our patients,
who are also our family members.
And to even make it more difficult
is when you have to endure
with them through terminal illnesses
or even be the one
to give them the diagnosis
—a bad diagnosis, a grave one.
And then,
when you’ve gone through
all the difficult situations with them,
to be the one
to pronounce them as clinically dead.
You know,
even though we know
that we’re going to see them
back in the new world,
it can really wrench your heart out.
For me, coming to Bethel
was a complete new experience
in medical care.
You’re treating, essentially,
your brothers and sisters,
and they become your family.
So your emotional involvement
and commitment
—it’s much deeper.
I recall the words of my father,
he said: “A physician
tends to treat his patients
“with his brain, or his head.
But he treats his family with heart.”
And here there’s this duality
that we have patients
but our patients are our family
—brothers and sisters—
so how to deal with that?
It’s very difficult.
So one of the things that really helps me
to be able to work with the situation
is what Paul said
at Colossians 4:14 about Luke,
and he was “the beloved physician.”
So there are two words in there, “physician”;
medical care, it was given (the medical care)
but in a loving way.
So that can be done,
and that really inspires me
to be able to provide to my patients
the best medical care with tender affection.
As physicians,
we don’t want to see people suffering.
And whenever we’re dealing
with our dear brothers and sisters,
it’s different;
it’s our family.
And treating our family
is more difficult.
Talking to patients
about what they are facing
—pain; suffering;
and even terminal,
incurable diseases—
this makes my occupation stressful
and emotionally charged,
especially when I have to break bad news.
But at those times,
besieging Jehovah in prayer,
asking for strength and wisdom,
also having the support
of my overseers at the infirmary.
They accompany me sometimes
to talk about critical issues
with the patients,
and they pray
even for me and for them.
So, even though it’s stressful,
I never feel overwhelmed.
Very interesting.
Now, going in another direction,
on the other side of this,
how do you stay positive
despite the negative circumstances
that we’ve just talked about?
Walter, how do you do that?
Yes, Ralph, heart disease,
breast cancer, and prostate cancer
are still the leading causes
of death in the Bethel family.
In such cases,
we stay positive by sharing
our absolute confidence
in the nearness of Jehovah’s promises.
And that tends to be
a two-way interchange.
We attempt to encourage others,
but we are also encouraged
by many of these very mature people
that we’re working with.
And they see things very clearly.
And we also rejoice
because we’re able to participate
in some of the positive outcomes
for the greater majority
of the individuals that suffer illness.
For example, the majority of our patients
with breast cancer are cured
—more than 90 percent.
And in prostate cancer
the majority are cured,
but there is also a large portion
that live a long time with their disease
—a productive life with their disease.
So that helps us
—the positive outcomes.
But also with heart disease,
we are now having much better outcomes.
People are living more productive lives
and actually living longer.
Additionally, the Bethel environment
is a very positive place
to develop spiritual qualities,
such as it is.
And we get help from the Bethel table;
they deal with faith based on facts.
And it helps persons
with scientific orientation;
it helps us to know
that our faith is very sound.
I think of three factors.
The one is having a loving spouse.
Nyla is always
—and the family—
always supportive of me
being available 24 hours a day,
seven days a week to the Bethel family.
And then the love that we have as a team
—our nurses and all those
who work in the infirmary.
We have such a bond of love
between us and the patient.
It sustains us,
and that’s a beautiful thing to see.
And then Jehovah’s spirit
—the joy we get from that spirit,
the joy we pass on to our patients,
the trust we have in Jehovah,
the security we have.
And that powerful force
—the greatest thing in the universe—
helps me through
as it does the patients.
And I think he speaks for all of you
when he says he really appreciates
the support the nurses, the PCAs,
and all of the staff give you.
I’ve heard you comment on that many times.
Thank you, Brother Jack.
Let’s go to Brother Harper,
how would you respond to this
—keeping positive in spite
of the things you have to deal with?
I focus on the positive
—the things that we can do for the patient
to make them have a better quality of life.
And that gives us some personal satisfaction.
The other thing
is that we concentrate on the positive
by means of what the Scriptures tell us
about the fact that all
of these things are only temporary.
I look at Jesus.
Even though he was about to raise Lazarus
and he knew what he was going to do,
he still broke out crying.
Why did he do that?
Because he felt the pain
that they were enduring,
and we feel it too.
So it’s OK to cry.
But we know that the end result
will be for the benefit of everybody.
Hope.
I think just the fact that I remember
that this situation is temporary
—the illness of the friend.
And one verse that I really, really like
is Revelation 21:4, where, at the end,
it says that all things have passed away.
So we won’t remember any of those things.
Although it’s hard right now,
it’s not something
we will live with in the future.
The thing that really helps me a great deal
is to see the faith
and the love for Jehovah in patients
who have a serious,
very painful terminal illness.
I see that they love Jehovah,
and that’s crystal clear like a diamond
—that love and faith in Jehovah.
And it really strengthens my faith,
no matter how much they’re suffering.
And they know
that they’re going to be resurrected.
There’s no doubt whatsoever in their minds
that in the words of Hosea 13:14:
“Where are your stings, O Death?”
There was one sister, a long-time missionary
who was dying of a very painful cancer
—rapidly progressive cancer—
and she’d been healthy
all her life until then,
and she had a complete faith
in the resurrection.
And one of her last expressions was:
“I never died before.
I didn’t know it’d be so hard.”
But she knew what was coming after that.
That’s a touching experience.
Last question:
Can you share your comments
about looking forward to the time
when you’ll no longer have your jobs?
In the new world, we won’t need this work.
What do you think about that, Worae?
Well, I particularly look forward, Ralph,
to a time that I wouldn’t have
to be woken up in the night,
you know,
to care for dear ones who are in pain.
I can have the time to enjoy
time with my dear wife in the new world
and pursue skills such as drawing, painting,
designing beautiful buildings.
And, you know, enjoying the art and music
into eternity with my wife.
And I look forward very much to that.
So I can easily let this go.
For several years
Worae has been asking
to work in the Art Department,
so you’ll have your day.
It’s a promise.
Brother Carleton, please,
new world, no more physician?
That will be a wonderful day!
The only thing I look forward to is those
who we haven’t been able to help,
then I can welcome them back.
I’ll be young, and they’ll be young.
And that’ll be a beautiful time.
But the peace and security
that the world will hold
—the creation, the sounds of birds,
nothing man-made interfering with noises.
But seeing the animals play
and learning about the plants
and having my own garden
with the family together doing these things.
Sister Anne Marie?
We are often asked
to imagine ourselves in the new system.
And for me, it’s never been
like a specific house or a place,
but it’s always been to know
that everybody wakes up in the morning,
they’re happy, they don’t have any pain,
they’re ready for a full day of activity.
For me, that’s the new system,
and I’m ready to go there.
Thank you,
and Enrique Corvalan, please?
Here on this side of life,
we can say we treat
and take care of our friends.
It could be an illness, severe or minor.
But the end is all death.
So in the new system,
what I’m looking for
is that there’s not going to be
any illness or diseases.
And on top of that,
we will be able to see
the ones who we have left,
because they’ve gone into death,
come back
—not leaving but coming back,
coming back to life.
So I’m looking forward
to being able to be,
eventually,
one of the reception committee.
Yeah, waking and receiving
those brothers and sisters
and family members,
dear family members,
who we have lost in death.
Beautiful, beautiful thought.
Walter, no more doctoring,
new world, what do you say?
I don’t think I’ll have
any problem with that at all.
In fact, we have
so many beautiful brothers and sisters
that Jehovah has created
with minds that we’ll now be able
to employ them in more useful activities.
But I think for me the most important thing,
I think, would be that in the new system
I’ll be able to learn
and associate more with Jehovah
without the distractions we have today.
And I think that’s going
to be a marvelous hope
to open up for everyone,
and I certainly look forward to that.
Profound thought.
Thank you.
And, dear Brother Luis Garza?
I will be extremely happy to give up
the practice of medicine in the new world.
With all these promises
that Jehovah has made for us,
we will not need the practice of medicine.
Thank you.
And, James Harper?
I look so forward
to the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises.
I just can’t wait.
And, actually,
I look forward to giving up this assignment.
But many people in the past have said,
“Well, you won’t have a job.”
I’m not concerned
because Jehovah won’t let me go unemployed.
He’ll give me a very interesting
and challenging assignment, I’m sure.
Very good, thank you.
And, Brother Howard?
Peace, nature, animals, music,
happy people all loving Jehovah
and loved by him
working together to serve him.
I just want to be there.
And, Sister Olga Manson?
When Jesus was on earth,
he did powerful works of curing the sick
and resurrecting the dead.
And to me, that is an evidence
that Jehovah and Jesus
are very interested in our health
and also that they are
better doctors than I could ever be.
So I can’t wait to be out of a job.
And I think every one of us
agrees with every one of you.
We yearn for the day
when you will not be doctors.
Yeah.
But in the meantime,
we want to thank you,
not just for your expressions today
but for your dedicated view
of your sacred service
at Bethel as physicians.
In fact, we’re grateful
for the entire medical staff.
And I know when we talked about this before,
you dear folks in your comments
applauded those who
support you in your work.
We appreciate that you’re willing
to use your training,
not for selfish pursuits
but for Kingdom interests.
But even more than that,
we appreciate
what we’ve seen here among you,
and that’s your deep spirituality.
It’s so evident, and we thank you for that.
So you’ve given not only your skills
but as Paul mentions
at 1 Thessalonians 2:8,
you remember there,
he says we’ve given ‘our very souls.’
And that’s what you dear folks have done.
Most of all, who do you think we thank?
Jehovah.
Why?
Because he cares for faithful ones
and he strengthens such ones,
including yourselves.
I’d like to read what Paul said
in one of his letters to a congregation.
I’d like for you dear folks to hear it
in the context of all of us
saying this about you:
“We always thank God
when we mention all of you . . . ,
“for we continually remember
your faithful work,
your loving labor,
and your endurance.”
And all of us yearn for the time
when “no resident” in the entire earth
“will say: ‘I am sick.’”
Thank you very much.
That was indeed a unique interview.
And we appreciate their love for Jehovah
and their love for their fellow servants
and the loving way
in which they use their talents.
It’s also unique in that they
will all lose their jobs in the near future.
They seem to be happy for that though.
I would just like to mention
that this interview
was featuring
the United States branch medical provisions.
While it’s true
that all branches around the world
have arrangements in place to care
for their Bethel families’ medical needs,
the doctors interviewed just now
take care of over 4,500 members
of the Bethel family
here in the United States,
including long-term members of the family
and temporary volunteers.
The cost to provide
outside doctor’s care for that many people
would be very, very expensive,
especially since medical costs
in the United States are so high.
However, these doctors just interviewed
receive the same small monthly allowance
as all other Bethel family members.
This has saved hundreds
of thousands of dollars
of contributed funds each year.
So we would like to thank
the doctors for their fine spirit
and all of those working with the infirmaries
for their skill and efficiency.
But above all, we thank them
for their warm brotherly affection
when we are often feeling our worst.
You’re good medical caregivers,
and we want you to know
that you do good work.
You’re definitely needed
—for now.
Oh, by the way,
if any of these doctors or any other doctor
should ask you
to please stick out your tongue,
don’t try to swallow it.
Stick it out!
They’re just trying to help us,
even though you’re not in Tibet.
Well, it’s time for you to stand
—that is, if you’re able—
and “sing out joyfully” to Jehovah.
Since none of you have the new songbook
with this new numbering system,
we’re going to use the song numbers
from the songbook
you currently have access to.
It is one of our new songs.
The number we have been using
is song number 152,
“Our Strength, Our Hope, Our Confidence.”
We now will enjoy a number of talks
from members of the Governing Body.
Brother David Splane is ready
to present his talk,
“Trust in Jehovah and Do What Is Good.”
Brother Splane, our ears are ready
to hear what your tongue has to say.
We’ll see.
Jehovah created all of us
with some remarkable abilities.
He gave us the ability to solve problems
and plan for the future,
and he also gave us
the ability to carry out our plans.
Now, how does he want
us to use our abilities?
To benefit others.
Why?
Because he knows that when we
are serving others, we’re happy.
God loves us,
and he wants us to be happy.
Now, at the same time,
Jehovah realizes
that we all have limitations.
He realizes it,
but sometimes we don’t.
And so all of us have to learn
to set reasonable goals for ourselves
and then to rejoice, to be happy,
when we have achieved these goals.
Now, some really have to learn that.
They’re never satisfied;
they never have enough money;
they never have enough service privileges;
they always want more, more, more.
And what’s the result?
They’re never happy.
We have to be able to rejoice
over what we can do
and not fret over what we cannot do.
Now, if our goals
are in line with Jehovah’s purpose,
we can be sure that he will back us up.
In fact, the writer of the 37th Psalm
was convinced of this.
Here’s a man who had
personal experience with Jehovah,
and he knew how Jehovah would back him up
if he put his trust in Him.
Let’s read Psalm 37:3.
And here we see that the writer
is speaking to us from personal experience.
He says:
“Trust in Jehovah
and do what is good.”
Well, that’s the theme of this talk,
isn’t it?
“Reside in the earth,
and act with faithfulness.”
The 37th Psalm
was written by David of Bethlehem
and apparently near the end of his life,
because he wrote:
“I was once young and now I am old.”
Now, David was only 70 when he died,
so I think some of us
would object to that characterization.
I can just about hear Brother Herd say,
“Who are you calling old?
We can still hear
crickets chirping and birds singing.”
But let’s say that David
was speaking from his own experience
and that he’s sharing his experience
as a mature man with us;
he wants us to benefit from the things
that happened to him in his lifetime.
And what a life David led!
So for the next few minutes,
we’re going to review
a few highlights of David’s life
and we’re going to see how David’s life
was really directed by his trust in Jehovah.
Jehovah God was guiding him
every step of the way,
and it’s a real benefit for us.
Now, do you realize
that when David was born,
Saul had been reigning over Israel
for ten years already?
But Jehovah wasn’t pleased with Saul.
In fact, much earlier,
He had sent the prophet Samuel
to tell the king:
“Jehovah will find
a man agreeable to his heart,
“and Jehovah will commission him
as a leader over his people,
because you did not obey
what Jehovah commanded you.”
Now, that was Jehovah’s promise to Saul,
but He didn’t carry it out right away;
He didn’t provide
for Saul’s replacement right away.
In fact,
it was probably more than a quarter century
before David was anointed
as the future king of Israel.
And maybe Saul thought that Jehovah
had forgotten all about replacing him,
but Jehovah hadn’t,
and David was anointed.
Now,
it was some time after that
that a Philistine from Gath,
the giant Goliath,
challenged the battle lines
of the living God:
‘Choose for yourselves a man
that he might fight with me.’
Young David was visiting the camp,
and he overheard this.
And he couldn’t understand
why none of the Israelite soldiers
were willing to take up the challenge,
and so he expressed his concern.
And his oldest brother, Eliab,
heard what David was saying,
and he rebuked his younger brother.
Well, older brothers
have a tendency of doing that, don’t they?
We read about the conversation
in 1 Samuel chapter 17,
and we’re going to make a point with this.
1 Samuel 17:28, 29:
“When his oldest brother Eliab
heard him speak to the men,
“he became angry with David and said:
“‘Why have you come down?
“‘And with whom did you leave
those few sheep in the wilderness?
“‘I well know your presumptuousness
and the bad intentions of your heart;
“you came down just to see the battle.’
“To this David said:
‘What have I done now?
I was only asking a question!’”
Isn’t the wording of that realistic?
Isn’t that what you would hear
in your own family?
Now, what was the problem with Eliab?
He was viewing David according to the flesh.
To Eliab,
David was still his pesky little brother,
but he should have known better.
Why?
Because Eliab had been present earlier
when Samuel had anointed David
as the future king of Israel.
Now,
the current king of Israel wasn’t willing
to take up the challenge
that Goliath threw out.
So wasn’t it only reasonable
that the next in line to the throne
should take up the challenge?
There was nothing presumptuous
about what David was doing.
Now picture this:
Here you have, on the one hand
—David—
a shepherd,
probably in his teens and,
on the other
—Saul—
a seasoned warrior,
probably in his late 60’s.
And we have to ask,
What did David have that Saul was lacking?
Trust
—trust in Jehovah.
David was going to work
with Jehovah on this assignment,
but David realized
that trust alone was not enough.
You could trust that Jehovah would raise up
someone else to fight Goliath,
but that wouldn’t do any good.
David wanted to trust in Jehovah,
but he also wanted to do something about it
—to do something good.
But didn’t David run the risk
of being killed by Goliath?
Not a chance.
Why?
Because Jehovah had had David anointed
to rule over Israel
and David hadn’t become king yet.
Do you think
that an uncircumcised Philistine like Goliath
could stand in the way
of Jehovah fulfilling His purpose?
Never!
Never would that happen.
Neither Goliath nor Saul nor anyone else
was going to prevent David
from becoming the king.
He would live,
as long as he was faithful to Jehovah.
David had complete trust in Jehovah,
and his trust was rewarded.
So he was again
drawing on personal experience.
If we turn back to Psalm 37,
we’ll be reading quite a bit
from Psalm 37 now,
so you can keep your Bibles open there.
He’s again drawing on personal experience
when he writes what we read in verse 5.
So that’s Psalm 37:5:
“Commit your way to Jehovah;
“rely on him,
and he will act in your behalf.”
Now, the Philistines were
sworn enemies of Israel,
but David had enemies closer to home.
And he could have become embittered
to realize that intimate associates of his
and even family members had betrayed him.
But, on the whole,
David was a spiritual man.
And we might ask,
How does a spiritual man handle betrayal?
Notice verse 8.
He says:
“Let go of anger and abandon rage;
do not become upset and turn to doing evil.”
Now, why could David adopt this attitude
when he was being betrayed?
He had a warm personal relationship
with Jehovah God;
he knew his God.
He knew that Jehovah hears everything;
He sees everything.
He knew that God cares.
And notice Psalm 37:18.
David writes:
“Jehovah is aware
of what the blameless go through.”
Isn’t that reassuring?
“And their inheritance will last forever.”
Now, David was a strong man,
a valiant warrior.
We recall when David would return from battle
that the women would sing:
‘Saul has killed his thousands,
David his tens of thousands.’
But David did not rely
on his military prowess
in dealing with his enemies
—he turned to Jehovah.
And we find evidence of that
in verses 12 and 13 of the 37th Psalm.
David writes:
“The wicked man plots against the righteous;
“he grinds his teeth at him.
“But Jehovah will laugh at him,
for He knows that his day will come.”
So there’s always this sense with David
that whatever is happening,
Jehovah sees it;
Jehovah is observing it,
and Jehovah is going to step in in due time
—very encouraging.
And so often in the Psalms—
We’ve been reading in the Psalms now
in our Bible reading,
and haven’t you noticed
so often in the Psalms
that this strong man,
this rugged man
—David—
beseeches Jehovah to give him
a way of escape from his enemies?
Now, a lot of people in this country
would think that that was a coward’s act.
In this country,
there are so many people who say:
“Don’t give in.
Don’t back down.
“Stand your ground.
Buy a weapon.
Keep it by your bedside.”
Not David
—David took comfort
in what we read
in verse 28 of Psalm 37:
“Jehovah loves justice.”
So he placed his case before Jehovah God.
David had to struggle with his conscience
on more than one occasion.
Do you remember what happened
when David was running away from Saul
and he came to Ahimelech the priest?
Now, Ahimelech didn’t know
that David was a fugitive,
and David wasn’t interested
in letting him know that.
Instead, he told the priest:
“The king instructed me to do something,
but he said,
“‘Do not let anyone know anything
about the mission
on which I am sending you.’”
Well, that wasn’t true.
Then David asked for bread for his men,
and the priest was happy
to give him bread and provisions.
Saul found out about it,
and he was furious.
He directed that Ahimelech
and his household
be put to death
and, in all, 85 priests were slaughtered.
Ahimelech was deceived.
He thought he was helping
an emissary of King Saul.
Do you think he
would have been so willing to help
if he had known the true situation?
Maybe not.
When those 85 priests are resurrected,
I think David is going to have
a little explaining to do.
Well, was David’s conscience stricken?
You better believe it.
He told Ahimelech’s only surviving son:
“I am personally responsible
for the death of everyone
in your father’s house.”
How do you live with that?
How do you live with being responsible
for the death of so many people?
What could David do?
What was done was done.
He couldn’t change the past.
Would he become paralyzed with guilt
or overwhelmed by feelings of worthlessness
and become inactive in Jehovah’s service?
Not David.
What he could do was protect
the last remaining member
of the house of Ahimelech,
and that’s exactly what he did.
As we know,
there were other conscience matters.
David committed adultery with Bath-sheba
and had her husband, Uriah, killed.
So he sinned against Jehovah,
he sinned against Uriah,
and he sinned against his other wives.
Imagine poor Abigail.
She’d been rescued from one bad marriage,
and now her new husband
had betrayed her.
When his sins came to light,
how did David react?
Well, here’s what he could not do:
He could not resurrect Uriah.
But he could sincerely repent
of his sins, and he did.
And, in turn,
the prophet Nathan told him:
“Jehovah . . . forgives your sin.”
What else could David do?
He could have faith
—faith that Jehovah really meant it
when He said that He forgave His servant.
Well, what about us?
In some cases, we may not be able
to undo our mistakes in our current lifetime.
We may have to live with the consequences.
But here’s what we can do:
We can take Jehovah at his word,
trusting that he will support
us through difficult times
—even if the difficult times
are of our own making.
David allowed Jehovah
to help him recover spiritually.
I’m going to repeat that.
David allowed Jehovah
to help him recover spiritually.
How did he do that?
Well, one way
was by humbly accepting the counsel
of an experienced elder,
the prophet Nathan.
His repentance was sincere.
There was no—
There was no facade about it.
We know that.
We know that David
repented with a good attitude
because later David and Bath-sheba
even named one of their sons Nathan,
and you don’t do that if you resent someone.
He took the counsel with a good attitude.
David learned from his mistakes,
and he kept on doing what was good.
Now, he may have been thinking
of himself when he wrote
what we read at Psalm 37:23, 24:
“Jehovah guides the steps of a man
when He finds pleasure in his way.
“Although he may fall,
he will not be hurled down,
for Jehovah supports him by the hand.”
And David felt that support
on many occasions.
Well, how can we learn
from David’s example?
If we sin, we have to let
Jehovah help us recover.
And more often than not,
he’ll use the elders for that purpose.
What about you faithful parents
whose child has gone astray?
David would understand your sorrow
—the sleepless nights, the tears,
the heartache, the worry.
One of his own sons, Amnon,
raped his daughter Tamar.
Another of his sons, Absalom,
killed Amnon and then fled
the country for three years.
Finally, the Bible says:
“David longed to go to Absalom,
for he had become reconciled
to the death of Amnon.”
So he called him back.
You might say, in effect,
that Absalom got
a three-year time-out for murder.
Did he appreciate the mercy?
No, he did not.
He tried to take the throne from David,
conspired against his own father.
And you wonder,
‘What was he thinking?’
Because at the time
he was plotting against David,
he must have known
that Jehovah had declared
that it was Solomon who was going
to succeed his father and not Absalom.
He must have known that.
Did he really think that he
could frustrate Jehovah’s purpose?
Wicked Absalom was finally put to death,
and David was devastated.
The poor young man
—seems he had a weak spot
for his wicked sons.
You know,
when we think of permissive parents,
we often think of High Priest Eli
and his sons, Hophni and Phinehas.
But when you think about it,
David was a bit permissive himself.
And you wonder if Solomon
wasn’t thinking of his own half brothers
when he encouraged parents to use the rod.
Now, David couldn’t force his wicked sons
to respect Jehovah’s standards,
but there was something he could do.
He had a faithful son at home, Solomon.
And so David and Bath-sheba
could lavish Solomon
with the love and affection that he deserved
and also help him to grow spiritually.
And they obviously did,
because at Proverbs 4:3 we read—
These are Solomon’s words:
“I was a true son to my father
and the one especially loved by my mother.”
And then he added:
“He taught me.”
So David obviously was teaching
his son to grow spiritually.
Now, it doesn’t always happen that way.
Consider this true-to-life scenario:
A brother and sister have two sons.
One leaves the truth
and the other remains faithful.
The parents are heartbroken, and like David,
they go into mourning for their son.
And that’s completely understandable,
but we have to ask:
What about the son at home
who has remained faithful?
What about the son who has never given
his parents a moment’s grief?
Will he continue to get
the love and affection
that he so richly deserves,
or will it be all about his brother?
Many of our modern-day fellow believers
have demonstrated their trust in Jehovah.
One brother who remained faithful
till his death in 2015,
said this:
“Life is unpredictable at times,
“uncertain, and even hard to deal with.
But Jehovah blesses those who lean on him.”
And his advice:
“Pray to be as productive
“and as active in Jehovah’s service
as you can be.”
And notice this:
“Focus on what you can do,
not on what you cannot do.”
That excellent advice
is being followed by traveling overseers
who are transitioning
into other forms of service.
It’s also being applied
by longtime members of the Bethel family
who are no longer serving
as department overseers.
They are grateful to Jehovah
for what they can do,
and they focus on that.
As this system of things
degenerates from bad to worse,
we can expect difficult times.
When that coalition of nations,
known as Gog of Magog,
launches its final attack on God’s people,
it will seem that there is no way out.
Our most formidable weapon
at that time will be our faith.
And so, brothers, it’s fitting
that our yeartext for 2017 should be
Psalm 37:3:
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good.”
Thank you very much, Brother Splane.
We’ll remember that talk
at least until the end of next year.
Your talk was well-spoken, as usual.